---
title: Into the Jungle
date: "2020-06-16T20:33"
description: "Civilizations rise and fall"
---

The border between Belize and Guatemala is rife with tension, even basic liberties such as using the toilet comes with a fee. A lady is sitting on a stool by the sink as I walk into the restroom and she hands me a handful of toilet paper in exchange for two USD. I carefully count the number of sheets to divide them into four even sections, and in the process, painfully become aware that this is not the two-ply Charmin toilet paper that I am used to. Some time later, I emerge from the restroom feeling relieved that I did not have to wave another two dollars over the top of my stall. Toilet paper as a precious commodity is a foreign concept to me.

Border crossing is a much more familiar concept, but this is the first time I am crossing a border by foot, rather than by car or by airport. As my travel companions and I wait in line, armed guards surround us, sinking their shaded gaze into our sun-scorched skin. We may be here for pleasure, but the border is serious business. In recent history, Guatemala tried to invade Belize on three separate occasions, on the account of reclaiming disputed territory. During the last time that Guatemala mobilized its troops against Belize, armed conflict was threatening to break out any day but then a major earthquake struck on the Guatemalan side. Guatemala had to recall their military for disaster relief and Belize claimed victory by divine intervention.

One-by-one, our passports are stamped as we cross into Guatemala and load into the waiting tour bus on the other side. Our Belizean tour guide hands over the talking baton to his Spanish-speaking counterpart and silences his political opinions for the rest of the ride. I am amazed by how collaborative people can be when working towards a common goal, even when their foundational beliefs are on the verge of war. Getting this bus loaded with Americans safely to their destination is a transaction that keeps families fed on both sides of the border. Part of that hard earned money from tourism eventually flows into the respective governments’ coffers, fueling an eventual war that only God can prevent.

Our destination is Tikal, an ancient Mayan city located in the jungles of modern-day Guatemala. In popular culture, the Mayans are touted as a people who suddenly disappeared from their cities in the 8th century due to some unknown cataclysm. Our Belizean tour guide is quick to correct us on that account, “Ah Maya. Wi neva disapyaa. Evryting gud”, he will remind us with every passing opportunity. The Mayans may live on, but Tikal has long been abandoned, and over the course of a thousand years, even the tallest of its pyramids became covered with thick jungle vegetation.

The first of many pyramids stands before me, not too far from the city border. Only the tip of its structure is excavated; the base of the pyramid is indistinguishable from a jungle hill. When I had researched Tikal, I saw a city of sprawling pyramids overlooking a lush green ground. Now being on the ground, I realize that the scene I committed to memory is but a small city square and there are far more pyramids on the outskirts of the city, most of which are barely excavated. My completionist instinct immediately deplores the half finished state of the excavation. “How hard can it be to cut a few more trees down?” I wonder. As I walk further into the city, the answer to my own question slowly appears before me in the form of sweat droplets, mixed in with sunscreen and bug repellant. No amount of pictures or videos of Tikal can truly convey the feeling of being pounded by the junglar heat and attacked by insects from all directions. When I consider working under these conditions, it suddenly makes perfect sense to fully excavate only a pyramid or two, and leave the rest to the tourists’ imaginations.

Trapped in the demoralizing thoughts of ruins and the sweaty work it took to uncover the ruins, I find myself searching Tikal for signs of its former glory. Not far from the city square is a stone ball court, a much smaller version of the Roman Colosseum, with bleachers on the side overlooking the action. In a ball game, two teams are pit against each other with the simple objective of keeping the ball in play. Unlike a gladiatorial match, people don’t usually die during a game, the killing comes afterwards: the captain of the losing team is sacrificed to appease the gods.

Standing by one of their human sacrificial stones, I close my eyes trying to picture the events that took place here two thousand years ago; I feel my crackling lips and burning skin, and then, nothing. For all the humans that fell on this stone, there isn’t even a ghost in sight. All that remains is the here and now and I am forever grateful that I can breathe the air above these ruins and live today.
