---
title: Reflections
date: "2020-05-13T23:25:03.284Z"
description: "Maximizing utility before and after the crisis"
---

“It broke,” the apprentice said in a shaky voice. For a brief second, a tense silence filled the air. “What broke?” the older man finally demanded. “The corner broke off,” he replied with a defeated look on his face, stepping back to reveal shattered glass littering the corner where the mirror joined the cabinet. The old man knelt down to inspect the damage, muttering profanity under his breath. He stared perplexedly into the cracked corner and placed a gentle touch on it as if willing it to heal. Unfortunately for him, and my mirror, the laws of physics rarely proved to be cooperative in times of catastrophe.

He offered me two choices: he could uninstall this mirror and come back another day with a freshly cut one, or cover up the crack with a metal strip and discount the purchase by 10%. My gut instinct wanted to take the first option, but the caveat of waiting for another day made me do a double-take. When I was young, I pretended to be an adult in *The Sims*; the whole premise behind the game was to go to work during the day and come back in the evening with simoleons to spend on furniture. Making money was easy, especially as a career burglar. Deciding on what to buy, however, never got any easier. Amongst other necessities, I often spent many hours buying and reselling mirrors, trying to find a perfect fit for my criminal mastermind’s ego.

The biggest difference between The Sims and real life was that transactions were instantaneous. If a mirror came cracked in The Sims, I could make it go *ka-ching* with two clicks of a mouse, and with two more clicks, *plop*, a new one would be conjured out of thin air. Instead, I found myself on P2, waiting for the loading dock door to open. The apartment overlords had promised to send someone down, yet here I was by myself 5 minutes later, with no cellphone reception, and a truck slowly losing its patience on the other side of the door. Unsure of whether to run back up or stay put, I figured that this must be what waiting on a date felt like in the 1980s when you weren’t sure if she might flake. I decided to take the advice every parent gives their child: don’t move if you get lost. After 5 more agonizing minutes, the door finally lifted, revealing a beautiful truck, fuming with exhaust.

The old man and his apprentice drove the truck into the loading dock and proceeded to unveil a giant sheet of glass, 5 feet wide by 7 feet tall. I watched them as they attached two round clamps, large as bear claws, to the back of the sheet and precariously lifted the glass from the magical apparatus that held it in place. The glass monster towered over me as we slipped into the elevator together; it barely fit diagonally and on its way out threatened to destroy itself against any door, wall, or frame. It finally got its wish, after 13 floors and a half dozen turns, proudly showing off its cracked pinkie as it sat smugly against my living room wall.

“I’ll take the discount,” I said to the old man. I remembered a time when I valued aesthetic perfection above all else; many late nights were spent tearing my hair out as I erased my calligraphy over and over again to fix their alignment on the lined paper. If 12 year old me were given the reins over my current predicament, he would’ve erased the crack, the mirror, and the old man for their imperfections. My eraser-happy charades continued well past my high school years until Economics 101 knocked the pen out of my hand. I learned that I had my priorities all backwards, I was chasing beauty when I should’ve been maximizing utility.

When I moved into the apartment, I shortened the distance to work from a 30 minute commute to a 10 minute walk. I saved 20 minutes each way, and given a 5 day work week with 52 weeks in a year, that would be 173 hours to make back the extra rent I paid. Instead of using the time to start a side business like any other sane person in San Francisco, I commissioned a large reflection of myself on the wall. The purpose of the mirror was to minimize the distance I had to travel to a dance studio for practicing swing dance. Dance partners would come to me, but more often than not, I danced with my reflection.

Between the mirror and the wall that stood across from it, nothing was to get in the way, not even a console table or a painting frame. Every inch contributed to another foot, another step I could take before having to reverse course. The entirety of my dance competency relied on the lifetime total of practice steps I took, and reversals of direction would only slow me down. I would’ve explained all of this to the old man as he slowly scribbled on my invoice, but that would’ve only slowed him down more. The clock was ticking, the mirror was waiting, and my feet were itching to start stepping.

A year and a half later, the crack in the mirror was a distant memory and the distance to work was now the distance between my bedroom and my living room. A desk was placed against the wall opposite the mirror, unceremoniously cutting off the end of my dance slot. Behind my desk, a yoga ball rolled idly beside its reflected twin, next to a yoga mat strewn across the floor. Two pieces of abstract art hung proudly above my desk in further defiance of the once-sacred space between wall and mirror. Without an open office, the apartment had lost its commute time saving utility, and without the prospect of a dance event given indefinite social distancing, the mirror decayed into decor.

Economics 101 taught me to maximize utility and I spent all these years hustling and bustling with no time to consider why. Now I had all the time in the world, yet the answer continued to elude me. I found myself standing in front of the mirror searching for clues, but there was no clear answer. I fell to the floor, disheartened, before propping myself back up. *One*, I counted.

Fifty pushups later, my arms shook as sweat dripped from my forehead. 51. I reminisced about the many nights I spent with sweaty people on the dance floor. 52. What wouldn’t I give for another whiff of human scent? 53. My arms collapsed underneath me and I face planted onto the yoga mat, filling my nostrils with a plasticy smell that symptomized yet another day free of covid-19. Just then, I saw a flicker in the reflection: behind mirror-me, atop the desk beneath the abstract art, a grid of portals zoomed into the homes of a dozen other challengers, pushing their hands against the floor. For a brief second, the world seemed familiar again, as people stood united in maximizing a common number: the number of times you can push yourself up from the floor.

