---
title: Picking Battles
date: "2020-05-21T13:29"
description: "Lessons learned on the basketball court"
---

Every summer evening, my friend George and I find ourselves at the park beside General Currie elementary school looking for an empty basketball court. Unfortunately, every other person living in the neighbourhood has the same idea. We scan the courts for the most amenable looking group of people, sometimes a father with his son or bent-out-of-shape university freshmen, and innocuously intrude the court they occupy, positioning ourselves at opposite ends of the three point line to start our shooting warmup. One of us will shoot while the other catches the rebound and passes it back to the shooter as a sign of respect if he scores. The whole process is very civil until one of us loses patience and rushes into the center of the court to catch our own rebounds. The situation devolves quickly as the three pointers rebound into two pointers and one pointers until we are in each other’s face trying to steal the ball or reject the other person with overzealous violence.

George and I are in eighth grade and both of us stand around 5 feet tall. We make up for what we lack in stature with wit, or so we like to think. The berserk conflict we find ourselves in, 15 minutes after our first warm up shot, is no accident; it is a show of force, demonstrating to the other people sharing our court that we may be small, but we mean business. Amid George’s mom jokes and my oddly strung together words of profanity that I recently learned, a mad blur of frantic movement takes over the court, getting in everyone’s way. Rather than scaring the others away, people tend to respond to our nuisance by challenging us to a half court game, which is exactly what we want: another chance to prove our valour.

There is great satisfaction in being challenged by older kids or adults. Unlike kids our own age on the high school basketball team who will gladly crush us with no mercy, here are fully grown people with degrees and progenies who are about to underestimate us. Little do they know that George is a beast of nature; he can run back and forth between the three point line and the hoop for hours on end without needing to take a single sip of water. Meanwhile, I avoid conflict like the plague, preferring to stay on the sidelines until they forget about me, only to suddenly re-emerge with a ball in hand (thanks for the pass, George), and whoosh, another one in the basket.

More often than not, our challengers also tend to be Chinese students or immigrants and they speak Mandarin to each other during the games. There are enough Canadian-born Chinese kids in the park such that they find it safe to assume that I also failed to learn my mother tongue properly. They code their strategy in Mandarin and I love the spark of confusion in their eyes when I foil their flawless plan. Soon enough, they will be shouting to each other in Mandarin, “Watch out for the small kid, he’s dangerous,” and I beam in delight. George and I developed our own codenames for strategies and my favourite is one called the triple-threat. The way it works is that in the later half of a game, I will shout “Triple threat!”, a signal for myself, George, and a third teammate to rush forward towards the hoop, firing the entirety of our pent up teenage angst towards the singular goal of getting the ball in the basket. It always feels super effective even if we don’t score, with the only downside being that there needs to be a long cooldown period before the threat levels are high enough for us to use it again.

In Vancouver, the sun doesn’t set until after 9pm, and our games continue well past darkness until all that is left is George, myself, and lamps illuminating the empty courts. This is when we begin our nightly ritual where we forbid each other from going home until we can score 2 consecutive two pointers and 2 consecutive three pointers in the exact order of me, him, me, him, and if any of us misses, we have to start over. The importance of the ritual cannot be understated. Without a basketball coach to train us, we must be consistent with our own routines. Not just anybody can win against highly educated Chinese because it takes perseverance through hard work and sophisticated regiments such as trying to get this ball into the basket in the right order at 11pm at night. Looking around the dark empty courts, we are the only ones who can live up to the challenge.

I always find it puzzling that the people who play with us come here every evening the same as we do and yet they are not as good as we are, so by association we are smarter than them, in spite of their fancy education. On the flip side, we avoid the people who can beat us, they’re cheaters because they used up all their academic studying time to train for basketball. This perfect combination of the Dunning-Kruger effect and denial makes an impenetrable shield against self doubt and the throngs of teenage depression. I get to pick my own battleground, one in which me and my team always emerge victorious. It is also a delusion, one that would gravely bite me in the years to come.
